---
title: "Grief"
emoji: ":sob:"
tags: God witness joy grief obedience CSLewis Shadowlands death heaven hell judgement Bible purpose
---

{% include post_title.html %}

Grief is an uncomfortable topic. 

Sometimes I imagine a widower draped in black, trying in vain to hide from the prying eyes of a crowded room. Grief is a heavy thing, too big to express: sobs and wails merely make a fool of it. So there are only hushed voices making light conversation -- nobody knows what to do; nobody knows what to say. 

Or perhaps I imagine a boy sobbing alone, among dusty rocking-horses and broken chairs in a old English attic. The structure of his life -- his place in the world -- the foundation of his self-awareness -- has disappeared beneath him without warning. He is lost.

I learnt to recognise grief from books and movies. But widows no longer wear black, and houses don't have attics. Nowadays, grief takes the form of memorial photo collages on social media. I suppose a Facebook post has a wider audience and a more permanent existence than an article of clothing ever did, but it seems shallower somehow. We long to acknowledge a person's life with significance.

Death signifies the end of a life. When it matters, we call death by other names. We say a person has "passed away" or "passed on". These phrases imply a continuation of the person's life in some unknowable existence, across an impenetrable boundary. The Salvation Army marks the death of a Christian by announcing they have been "promoted to glory". Christians believe that after death we will be judged by God. People who have accepted Jesus Christ as saviour and ruler will be welcomed to God's eternal kingdom, and those who have rejected Jesus Christ will suffer God's eternal punishment (if you want to know more, read the end of Hebrews chapter 9 and Matthew chapter 25 in the Bible).

The Bible provides many hints about the afterlife, but never a concrete description -- so nobody can say for certain what it will be like. But this is what we do know: we know it will be good. We know that when our Christian friends and family die, we should be glad for them. But that doesn't mean it doesn't hurt. 

Death feels unnatural. The grief I feel when I hear of a death is similar to the grief I experience when I hear of a divorce, or even two friends parting on bad terms. Relationships are meant to last; death gets in the way. According to the Bible, when humans first disobeyed God we were punished with a curse. God's punishment introduced death, unhealthy relationships, hard work, and pain (Genesis chapter 3). It hurts to live in this fallen world.

We can't talk about the Fall without talking about the Redemption. God enabled the descendants of Abraham to escape from Egyptian slavery and formed them into the nation of Israel. By understanding the history of Israel we can get to know who God is, what he loves, and how he acts. It helps us to make sense of who Jesus Christ was and what he did by allowing himself to be executed by the Romans. God lived on earth as a human called Jesus. Why? His death and resurrection frees us from our punishment. Through Jesus Christ, God offers us forgiveness for our disobedience. Why? Because he loves us.

If God loves us so much, why did he allow us to disobey him and suffer the consequences? I don't know, but I think there is love in his gift of choice. If we were constrained to obey we would be less able to appreciate his goodness.

If Jesus came to take our punishment, why is there still death and pain in the world? I don't know, but I think there is love in his gift of time. More time means more people will hear about his offer of forgiveness and have the opportunity to accept Jesus as saviour and ruler of our lives.

So what? Grief reminds me of what's important. It reminds me that all is not well. And it reminds me that I have the answers so many people are searching for. With an eternal perspective, I am motivated to tell everyone the good news of God's offer of forgiveness. 

If you don't know my God, I urge you for your own sake to consider researching the claims of Jesus and talking to God in prayer. 

If you know Jesus Christ as saviour and ruler of your life, I urge you to think of one practical action you can take to enable someone to hear the good news of God for the first time, even if it costs you. Life on earth gains purpose in context. 