---
title: "Waitangi: What Makes a Nation?"
emoji: ":scroll:"
tags: Aotearoa NewZealand God light root hope power love forgiveness humility
---

{% include post_title.html %}

This year I had the great privilege of being at Waitangi for the week of celebrations around Waitangi Day.

To appreciate the significance of this experience you'll need a quick history lesson. Waitangi is a small town in Te Tai Tokerau, Aotearoa (Northland, New Zealand). Te Tiriti o Waitangi (The Treaty of Waitangi) is widely regarded as the founding document of New Zealand. British politicians and Christian missionaries constructed and translated the treaty at Waitangi. Local Māori rangatira (chiefs) debated and signed the treaty at Waitangi on 6 February 1840, and others debated and signed the treaty around the country in the following months. Te Tiriti is a short document that outlines a desire for harmonious and mutually beneficial relations between Māori residents and the British crown, with particular emphasis on the division of power. For many decades, the Treaty was severely neglected and outright breached by the majority European population. The government of New Zealand instituted widespread systematic oppression of Māori economic power, language, and culture.

In 1932, Lord and Lady Bledisloe (Governor General of New Zealand) purchased the block of land where the treaty was first signed, and gifted it to the nation. In 1940 the centenary was commemorated on site. Annual commemorations began in 1947, but opinions were divided between "it ought to be discarded as a colonial trick" and "it ought to be honoured as a covenant of relationship". In the 1950s and 1960s, urbanisation and official assimilation/integration policies threatened the Māori language and culture with extinction. Around 1974 the day became an official national holiday. In 1987 te reo Māori was recognised an an official language of Aotearoa New Zealand.

Last week I camped at Waitangi with the Karuwhā Trust. The early Anglican missionary Henry Williams was nicknamed Karuwhā (Four-eyes) by his Māori friends because he was the first person they had ever seen wearing spectacles. He is renowned for his relational approach to Christian mission, his translation of Te Tiriti into te reo Māori, and his part in encouraging Māori rangatira to sign it. The Karuwhā Trust was founded in 2005 to raise awareness of our national history, which revolves around Te Tiriti and its breaches.

The Karuwhā Trust has established relationships with local Māori rangatira and marae residents creating opportunities for uninitiated newcomers to sit under the teachings and wisdom of Māori and Pakehā who have grown up in the storied land of Waitangi. Besides lectures, tours and church services, every participant in the Karuwha group was assigned a three-hour shift to help the marae with cooking meals, washing dishes, parking cars, collecting rubbish, or cleaning the toilets. Waitangi Marae offers meals all week to the thousands of people who visit the area for Waitangi commemorations.

Personally, I loved the opportunity to practice listening to te reo Māori -- I hope one day I will be brave enough to practice speaking it in public. I was surprised (though I should not have been!) by the prevalence of Christian belief among the Ngāpuhi hapū. All efforts towards reconciliation, both from Māori and from Pakehā, appear to be motivated by a Christian understanding of forgiveness, dignity, and humility. Recently many Pakehā have moved towards secular atheism while Māori kaumatua (elders) have retained their faith -- I wonder what effect this increasing difference will have on the willingness of Māori and Pakehā to engage in difficult yet necessary discussions with honesty and respect.

Our national anthem is a beautiful prayer for peace (Hebrew: _shalom_). I add my voice to millions of others from years gone by:

> E Ihowā Atua, (O Lord God,)  
O ngā iwi mātou rā (of all people)  
Āta whakarangona; (Listen to us;)  
Me aroha noa (Cherish us)  
Kia hua ko te pai; (May good flourish;)  
Kia tau tō atawhai; (May Your blessings flow;)  
Manaakitia mai (Defend)  
Aotearoa (New Zealand)  

> God of Nations at Thy feet,  
In the bonds of love we meet,  
Hear our voices, we entreat,  
God defend our free land.  
Guard Pacific's triple star  
From the shafts of strife and war,  
Make her praises heard afar,  
God defend New Zealand.  

> Men of every creed and race,  
Gather here before Thy face,  
Asking Thee to bless this place,  
God defend our free land.  
From dissension, envy, hate,  
And corruption guard our state,  
Make our country good and great,  
God defend New Zealand.

>_Lyrics and translation from [NZ Folk Song](http://folksong.org.nz/e_ihowa_atua/)_

I recommend that every person who considers themselves a New Zealander attend the Waitangi Day commemorations at least once in their lifetime. It feels like a right and proper pilgrimage. The Karuwhā Trust group provides a cloak of humility and service which seems like the right and proper way to approach this tohu (sign) of frustrated hope.

May we all learn to honour Te Tiriti, for the sake of our nation. I'm going to start by looking for a space to practice speaking te reo Māori. You could offer to help in the marae kitchen, or start pronouncing place names correctly, or educate yourself about your national history. Here are some links to get you started!

### Further reading
- [Archives NZ]([https://archives.govt.nz/discover-our-stories/the-treaty-of-waitangi])
- [Waitangi Day on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waitangi_Day)
- [Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern welcomed at Waitangi in 2018](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/feb/06/jacinda-ardern-waitangi-day-changes-new-zealand)
- [Te Ara - The New Zealand Encyclopedia](https://teara.govt.nz/en/the-new-zealanders/page-12)
- [Te Tai - Treaty Settlement Stories](https://teara.govt.nz/en/te-tai)
- [Two parties, two understandings](http://www.treaty2u.govt.nz/the-treaty-up-close/two-parties-two-understandings/index.htm)
- [Māori in Australia](https://e-tangata.co.nz/comment-and-analysis/and-there-he-lies-ever-ever-the-manuhiri/)
- [Treaty Times Thirty - translations](https://nzsti.org/assets/uploads/files/F_6984_NZT_Treatyx30.pdf)
- [Karuwhā Trust](https://www.karuwha.org.nz/)